4 EXPLORING SOME 
GEOMETRIC THEMES

In this chapter, we will explore two geometric themes. We will study 
fractals which are self-similar shapes. They exhibit the same or similar 
pattern over and over again — but at smaller and smaller scales. We will 
then look at different ways of visualising solids.

4.1 Fractals
One of the most beautiful examples of a fractal that also 
occurs in nature is the fern. The fern is seen to have smaller 
copies of itself as its leaves, and these in turn have even 
smaller copies of themselves in their sub-leaves, and so on!

Similar phenomena of self-similarity occur in trees 
(where a trunk has limbs, and a limb has branches, and the 
branches have branchlets, and so on), clouds, coastlines, 
mountains, lightning, and many other objects in nature.

Other mathematical fractals can also be very beautiful. 
We will explore some of them here.

Sierpinski Carpet
Fern

The Polish mathematician Sierpinski discovered a type of fractal known 
as the Sierpinski Carpet. It is made by taking a square, breaking it into 
9 smaller squares, and then removing the central square (see the figure 
below); the same procedure is then repeated on the remaining 8 squares, 
and so on. One then sees the same pattern at smaller and smaller scales.

. . .

Step 0 Step 1 Step 2

04_Chapter 4.indd   70 20-12-2025   16:43:39



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

Sierpinski Carpet

Draw the initial few steps (at least till Step 2) of the shape sequence that 
leads to the Sierpinski Carpet.
By its construction, each step in the sequence has 

(i)	 squares of the same size that remain in the figure, and the size of 
these squares becomes smaller and smaller as the step number 
increases, and 

(ii)	 square holes that are formed by removing square pieces. 
Do you see any pattern in the number of holes and squares that remain 
at each step? 

Let Rn represent the number of remaining squares at the nth step, and 
Hn represent the number of holes at the nth step. 

Let us understand how these numbers grow by analysing how the 
holes and squares that remain are generated from the previous step.  

Every square that remains at a given step, say Step n, gives rise to 
8 squares that remain at the (n + 1)th step. Thus, we have

Rn + 1 = 8 Rn.
Can this be used to get a formula for Rn?
We have

R0 = 1
R1 = 8 × 1 = 8
R2 = 8 × 8 = 82.

In general, Rn = 8n.
Similarly, how do we find the number of holes at a given step?

Every square that remains at the nth step gives rise to a hole in the 
(n + 1)th step. All the holes present at the nth step remain in the (n + 1)th 
step as well. Thus,

Hn + 1 = Hn + Rn.
So we have

R0 = 1	 H0 = 0
R1 = 8	 H1 = 1
R2 = 82	 H2 = 1 + 8
R3 = 83	 H3 = 1 + 8 + 82

...
71

04_Chapter 4.indd   71 20-12-2025   16:43:40



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

Sierpinski Gasket
Sierpinski came up with another fractal made in a similar way. An 
equilateral triangle is broken up into 4 identical equilateral triangles by 
joining the midpoints of the bigger triangle, and then the central triangle 
is removed. This procedure is repeated on the 3 remaining triangles, 
and so on.

. . .

Step 0 Step 1 Step 2

Sierpinski Triangle

Show that by joining the midpoints of an equilateral triangle, we divide 
it into 4 identical equilateral triangles.
[Hint: Note that the corner triangles are isosceles.]
This fractal is called the Sierpinski Triangle/Gasket.
Figure it Out

1.	 Draw the initial few steps (at least till Step 2) of the shape sequence 
that leads to the Sierpinski Triangle.

2.	 Find the number of holes, and the triangles that remain at each step 
of the shape sequence that leads to the Sierpinski Triangle.

3.	 Find the area of the region remaining at the nth step in each of the 
shape sequences that lead to the Sierpinski fractals. Take the area of 
the starting square/triangle to be 1 sq. unit.

72

04_Chapter 4.indd   72 20-12-2025   16:43:41



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

Koch Snowflake
The Koch Snowflake is another fractal, named after the Swedish 
mathematician Von Koch, who first described it in 1904. We have already 
encountered this fractal in Grade 6, Ganita Prakash.

. . .

Step 0 Step 1 Step 2

Koch Snowflake

To generate it, we start with an equilateral triangle. Each side is 
(i)	 divided into 3 equal parts, and

(ii)	 an equilateral triangle is raised over the middle part, and then 
the middle part is removed.

Effectively, each side gets replaced by a ‘bump’ - shaped structure . 
This procedure is repeated on the sides of the new resulting shape, and 
so on.
Figure it Out

1.	 Draw the initial few steps (at least till Step 2) of the shape sequence 
that leads to the Koch Snowflake.

2.	 Find the number of sides in the nth step of the shape sequence that 
leads to the Koch Snowflake.

3.	 Find the perimeter of the shape at the nth step of the sequence. 
Take the starting equilateral triangle to have a sidelength of 1 unit.

73

04_Chapter 4.indd   73 20-12-2025   16:43:41



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

Fractals in Art
Fractals have also long been used in human-made art! Perhaps the 
oldest such fractals appear in the temples of India. An example occurs 
in the Kandariya Mahadev Temple in Khajuraho, Madhya Pradesh 
which was completed in around 1025 C.E.; there one sees a tall temple 
structure, which is made up of smaller copies of the full structure, 
on which there are even smaller copies of the same structure, and 
so on. Fractal-like patterns also occur in temples in Madurai, Hampi, 
Rameswaram, Varanasi, among many others.

Kandariya Mahadev Temple

Fractals are also common in traditional African cultures. For example, 
patterns on Nigerian Fulani wedding blankets often exhibit fractal 
structures.

Nigerian Fulani Wedding Blanket

74

04_Chapter 4.indd   74 20-12-2025   16:43:44



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

In the blanket shown in the figure, there are diamond shaped patterns, 
inside of which there are smaller diamond shaped patterns, and so on.

The modern maestro of fractal art is undoubtedly the Dutch artist 
M.C. Escher. We have already seen that some of his prints explore the 
mathematical theme of tiling. One famous example involving fractals 
is his work ‘Smaller and Smaller’, which exhibits the identical pattern 
of lizards but at smaller and smaller scales. Here is a print inspired by 
Escher’s ‘Smaller and Smaller’.

4.2 Visualising Solids
Build it in Your Imagination
We will start this section by practising visualisation. For each prompt, 
feel free to talk to your partner, gesture, draw it in the air — but do not 
actually draw on paper!

My method is different. I do not rush into 
actual work. When I get an idea I start at once 
building it up in my imagination. I change the 
construction, make improvements, and operate 
the device entirely in my mind.

— Nikolas Tesla (1856 – 1943), the great 
Serbian-American engineer and inventor, who 
made fundamental contributions to electrical 
engineering and other fields.

1.	 Picture your name, then read off the letters backwards. Make sure 
to do this by sight, not by sound — really see your name! Now try 
with your friend’s name.

75

04_Chapter 4.indd   75 20-12-2025   16:43:45



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

2.	 Cut off the four corners of an imaginary square, with each cut going 
between midpoints of adjacent edges. What shape is left over? How 
can you reassemble the four corners to make another square?

3.	 Mark the sides of an equilateral triangle into thirds. Cut off each 
corner of the triangle, as far as the marks. What shape do you get?

4.	 Mark the sides of a square into thirds and cut off each of its corners 
as far as the marks. What shape is left?

When we see a solid object, we are really seeing its profile from a 
specific viewpoint. Depending on our viewpoint, the outline of this 
profile can vary dramatically!

Perhaps you’ve noticed interesting profiles of objects yourself, while 
taking a photograph or observing the shadow of an object? Or, maybe 
you’ve seen a cartoon like the following, in which a character bursts 
through a wall and leaves a hole shaped like their outline!

76

04_Chapter 4.indd   76 20-12-2025   16:43:49



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

In previous classes, you’ve seen solids that are much simpler than 
an elephant or cat, such as cubes, spheres, cylinders, and cones. What 
would the profiles of these look like, from different viewpoints?
Can you describe a solid and a viewpoint that would result in each 
of the following cases?  If it helps, you can imagine the solid passing 
through a wall like Tom did, and leaving a hole of the appropriate shape.

5.	 A solid whose profile has a square outline
6.	 A solid whose profile has a circular outline
7.	 A solid whose profile has a triangular outline

As we saw with the elephant, a given solid might have very different 
profiles from different viewpoints. Can you visualise solids that have 
the following contrasting profiles?

Spend some time on this, and if you are finding it difficult to visualise, 
you may look around and use objects that are around you, or that you 
will make in the next section. Feel free to consider viewpoints from any 
direction, including directly above the object.

8.	 A solid with a rectangular profile from one viewpoint and a circular 
profile from another viewpoint

9.	 A solid with a circular profile from one viewpoint and a triangular 
one from another viewpoint

10.	 A solid with a rectangular profile from one viewpoint and a 
triangular one from another viewpoint

11.	 A solid with a trapezium shaped profile from one viewpoint and a 
circular one from another viewpoint

12.	 A solid with a pentagonal profile from one viewpoint and a 
rectangular one from another viewpoint

Are there unique solids for each of the conditions, or can you come up 
with multiple possibilities?

Making Solids
Many basic solid shapes such as a cuboid, parallelopiped, cylinder, 
cone, prism, and pyramid can be made using foldable flat materials like 
paper, cardboard, and even metallic sheets! This is one of the methods 
for manufacturing hollow solids.

77

04_Chapter 4.indd   77 20-12-2025   16:43:49



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

Cuboid Parallelopiped Cylinder

Cone Triangular prism Triangular
pyramid

While discussing solids that contain plane surfaces in their boundaries, 
the notion of faces, edges and vertices serves a useful purpose.

Face

Vertex Edge

Face

Vertex Edge

Faces are the plane/flat surfaces of a solid that form its boundary. 
Edges are the line segments that form the sides of the faces, and vertices 
are the points at which the edges meet. For example, a cuboid or cube 
has 6 faces, 12 edges and 8 vertices.

78

04_Chapter 4.indd   78 20-12-2025   16:43:49



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

There are multiple types of prisms and pyramids, whose names 
depend on the shapes of their faces. 

Triangular Pentagonal Hexagonal
Prism Prism Prism

Prism: A prism, in general, has two congruent polygons as opposite 
faces, with edges connecting the corresponding vertices of these 
polygons.  All the other faces are parallelograms. Based on the shape 
of the congruent polygons, prisms may be called triangular prisms, 
pentagonal prisms, and so on.

Pyramids: A pyramid, in general, has a polygonal base and a 
point outside it, and edges connect the point with each of the vertices 
of the base. Based on the shape of the base, pyramids may be called 
triangular pyramids, square pyramids, pentagonal pyramids, and so on. 
A triangular pyramid is also known as a tetrahedron.

Triangular Pentagonal Hexagonal
Pyramid Pyramid Pyramid

If the congruent polygons of a prism have 10 sides, how many faces, 
edges and vertices does the prism have? What if the polygons have n 
sides?

If the base of a pyramid has 10 sides, how many faces, edges and vertices 
does the pyramid have? What if the base is an n-sided polygon?

Now we will see how to make different solids using a foldable flat 
surface such as paper, cardboard, etc.

The basic idea is to create a shape on a flat surface that can be folded 
into the solid. Such a shape is called a net. In other words, a net is 
obtained by ‘unfolding’ a solid onto a plane. 

79

04_Chapter 4.indd   79 20-12-2025   16:43:49



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

What is a net of a cube?
Fig. 4.1 is a net of a cube.
Visualise how it can be folded to form a cube. 

Practical Aspects of Using a Net
To make an actual cube from its net, certain practical 
aspects have to be kept in mind. One is that the material 
used must have sufficient sturdiness for the cube to Fig. 4.1
stand. The second aspect is that there should be some 
mechanism for attaching the faces together. If cardboard or a similar 
material is used, cello tape is one way to join the adjacent faces. For less 
sturdy materials, such as chart paper, it is useful to have extra ‘flaps’ on 
some of the faces that can be stuck to the adjacent faces.  You might have 
observed this strategy in packaging boxes.

(i) (ii) (iii)

However, when we talk about the net of a solid, we consider only the 
shape formed by unfolding the solid, and not the other supporting flaps 
that we may use to actually make the solid. 

Apart from using a net, there are other ways to make a cube 
from paper.

There are multiple possible nets one can use to build a cube.
Figure it Out

1.	 Which of the following are the nets of a cube? First, try to answer by 
visualisation. Then, you may use cutouts and try.

(i) (ii) (iii)

80

04_Chapter 4.indd   80 22-12-2025   12:53:20



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

(iv) (v) (vi)

2.	 A cube has 11 possible net structures in total. In this count, two nets 
are considered the same if one can be obtained from the other by a 
rotation or a flip. For example, the following nets are all considered 
the same —

	 Find all the 11 nets of a cube. Try
3.	 Draw a net of a cuboid having sidelengths: This

(i)	 5 cm, 3 cm, and 1 cm
(ii)	 6 cm, 3 cm, and 2 cm

Let us find out the nets of other solids.
A tetrahedron whose faces are equilateral triangles is called a regular 

tetrahedron. 
What is a net of a regular tetrahedron? Which of the following are nets 
of a regular tetrahedron?

Are there any other possible nets?
A regular tetrahedron has only 2 possible nets.
Draw a net with appropriate measurements that can be folded into 
a regular tetrahedron. Verify if it works by making an actual cutout. Math 

Talk
Draw a net with appropriate measurements that can be folded into 
a square pyramid. Verify if it works by making an actual cutout. 

81

04_Chapter 4.indd   81 20-12-2025   16:43:51



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

What is the net of a cylinder?
If the circular faces of a cylinder are unfolded, and if a cut is made 

along the height of the cylinder, as shown in the figure below, then 
we get

height

What are the sidelengths of the rectangle obtained?

How will the net of a cone look?

O

l

If the cone is slit open along the line l and then unrolled, what will we 
get?

Observe that all the points on the boundary of the base O
circle are at equal distances from ‘O’. So after unrolling the 
cone, the boundary of the net will be a portion of a circle 
with centre O.
What surface do you construct by using the above net, in which O  
is not the centre of the boundary circle?  Make a physical model to Math 
help you answer this question! Talk

Draw a net with appropriate measurements that can be folded into 
a triangular prism. Verify that it works by making an actual cutout. 

82

04_Chapter 4.indd   82 20-12-2025   16:43:51



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

Here is a solid called the octahedron, made by joining two square 
pyramids at their square bases. Math 

Talk

Octahedron

Can you visualise its net? This is one of its nets.

Taking all the triangles in the net to be equilateral, make a cutout Math 
of the net and fold it to form an octahedron. Talk

As in the case of cubes, an octahedron too has 11 different nets.
So far, we have seen solids whose faces are all equilateral triangles 

(regular tetrahedrons), and all squares (cubes). Does there exist a solid 
whose faces are all pentagons? Interestingly, the answer is yes!

This solid is called a dodecahedron. This solid too can be made from 
a net! Mathematicians have been even able to determine exactly how 
many nets a dodecahedron has — 43,380.

Dodecahedron
83

04_Chapter 4.indd   83 20-12-2025   16:43:57



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

Net of a sphere? Experiment and see if you can make a paper cutout 
that can perfectly wrap around a ball without leaving any wrinkles, gaps 
or overlaps. 

Shortest Paths on a Cube
Let us consider an interesting problem related to the discussion so far. 
We know that on a plane, the shortest path between two points is the 
straight line between them. Now, what is the shortest path between two 
points on the surface of a cuboid, if we are allowed to travel only along 
its surface?

Let us imagine a hungry ant living on the surface of a cuboid. To its 
good fortune, there is a laddu on the surface.

Laddu (at the centre of the top face)

Ant (at the centre of the side face)

What is the shortest path for the ant to reach the laddu? Math 
Talk

What about in the following case? 

Laddu (at the centre of the edge)

If we think that a certain path is the shortest, how can we be sure that it 
truly is, among all the infinite possibilities?
For example, are either of these the shortest path?

84

04_Chapter 4.indd   84 20-12-2025   16:44:00



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

[Hint: Draw the net and see how these paths appear on the net.]

What does this show?
A path on the surface of the cuboid can be transformed to a path of the 
same length on the net. Conversely, every path on the net transforms to 
a path of the same length on the cuboid.  

In the first case, the path marked on the cuboid is the shortest since 
it transforms to a straight line between the ant and laddu on the net, 
which is the shortest path between them.

In the second case, the path marked on the cuboid does not transform 
to a straight line path on the net, and hence is not the shortest path for 
the ant to take.

Laddu (at the centre of the edge)

The red path is the shortest

Thus, by using a net, we convert the problem of finding the shortest 
path on a cuboid to the problem of finding the shortest path on the net. 

Have we now completely analysed the problem of finding the shortest 
path between two points on a cuboid? 

85

04_Chapter 4.indd   85 20-12-2025   16:44:03



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

Find the shortest path between the ant and the laddu in the following 
case:

4 cm
8 cm

Ant (at the centre of the face)

2 cm

If we unfold the cuboid as before, we get
8 cm

4 cm 4 cm

Notice the line segment between the ant and laddu going outside the 
net! Obviously, this does not correspond to any path on the cuboid. 
So what do we do now?

If the net is unfolded in the following way, then we get a path on the 
cuboid.

The shortest path

Thus, the way a cuboid is unfolded matters!

86

04_Chapter 4.indd   86 20-12-2025   16:44:05

4 cm

4 cm

4 cm 4 cm 4 cm

4 cm



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

Now we will look at a trickier case.
What is the length of the shortest path between the ant and the laddu? Try

This
30 cm

6 cm 12 cm
1 

cm

1 
cm laddu (stuck to the 6 cm

12 cm back of the box)

Here are some of the ways of unfolding the cuboid.

42 cm

32 cm

In the second case, the distance d between the ant and the laddu can 
be calculated using the Baudhayana Theorem, since we have a right 
triangle here.

d2 = 242 + 322

d = 1600 = 40 cm
We see that in each of these unfoldings, the lengths of the line segments 

between the ant and the laddu are different! So we have to carefully list 
all the possible different unfoldings to find the answer!

Representation of Solids on a Plane Surface
Drawing is one of the oldest human activities. People have been 
doing it for thousands of years for both aesthetic as well as practical 
and engineering purposes. Regarding the latter, making a drawing 
of an object is a useful way to record or convey information about it. 
Visual representation also helps us in thinking about the objects being 
represented. Such needs often arise in engineering — while constructing 
buildings, designing machines, etc. Further, engineering drawings need 87

04_Chapter 4.indd   87 22-12-2025   12:53:40

12 cm

24 cm

12 cm



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

to be detailed enough so that one can physically construct the objects 
they depict. 

We will now explore some ways of drawing solids on a plane.
Projections
The net of a solid (when it exists) is one way of representing a solid 
on the plane. But it can be difficult to visualise the solid from the net, 
without physically cutting out the net and folding it up. 

Another way to represent a solid is by looking at the projections of all 
its points on a plane. This idea is closely related to the profile of a solid 
from a specific viewpoint, which we discussed earlier. Let us see how 
this technique works.

X

O P

M

O is the projection of P

Consider a point P in space, and a plane M. Imagine a line from P 
intersecting the plane M at a point O.

We say that OP is perpendicular to the plane if for any line OX on 
the plane, ∠POX = 90°. In this case, we say that point O is the projection 
of point P on the plane. The projections of all the points of an object 
together form the projection of the object on the plane.
Let us visualise the projection of a line.

Projection
Projection

88 Fig. 4.2

04_Chapter 4.indd   88 20-12-2025   16:44:08



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

What happens to the length of a line in its projection?
Let us consider projections in Fig. 4.3. 

For example let l be the actual length of the C

line and p be the length of its projection. p
D

Draw AE ⊥ BC. AECD is a rectangle (why?). 
So, AE = DC = p. Also, ∠AEB = 90°. E

p

Can you now compare the lengths p and l? l B
A

When is the length of the projected line equal 
to its actual length? 

Fig. 4.3
What do you think are the different possible projections of a square Math 
that we get based on its orientation? Talk

What do you think is the projection of a parallelogram under 
different orientations? 

Can this ever be a quadrilateral that is not a parallelogram?
As a starting point, you could think about the projection of a pair of 
parallel lines.
What can you say about the projection of an n-sided regular polygon? Math 
[Hint: Projection of a polygon is composed of the projections of its Talk
sides.]
Let us consider projections of solids now. 
How would the projections of a cube and a cone look?

Fig. 4.4 Fig. 4.5
89

04_Chapter 4.indd   89 20-12-2025   16:44:08



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

If an object were to pass perpendicularly through a plane and form 
a hole, the shape of the hole would be the same as the shape of the 
projection of the object.
See Figures 4.2 – 4.5. In each case, see if you can visualise another object 
that gives the same projection.

Fig. 4.6

Different lines and different cuboids giving the same projections

We see that a given projection is not made by a unique object.

90

04_Chapter 4.indd   90 20-12-2025   16:44:08



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

Find another object that makes the same projection as that of a given 
cone.

For this reason, we often take three mutually perpendicular 
projections of an object. As shown in the figure, we consider a plane in 
front of the object called the vertical plane, a plane below the object 
called the horizontal plane and a plane to the side of the object called 
the side plane.

Top 
View

Vertical
Plane

Side
Plane

Front
View

Side
View

Horizontal
Plane

We give names to the projections on these three planes based on the 
directions from which the object is viewed. The projection on the vertical 
plane is called the front view, on the horizontal plane the top view and 
on the side plane the side view. These projections formalise the notion 
of profiles that we explored in an earlier section.
Let us see what these projections are for the objects shown in Fig. 4.6, 
when the planes shown are taken to be vertical planes.
Projections of the different lines in Fig. 4.6 —

91

04_Chapter 4.indd   91 20-12-2025   16:44:09



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

Front View Top View Side View

Projections of the different cuboids in Fig. 4.6 —
Front View Top View Side View

Figure it Out
1.	 Observe the front view, top view and side view of the different 

lines in Fig. 4.6. Is there any relation between their lengths? Math 
2.	 Find the front view, top view and side view of each of Talk

the following solids, fixing its orientation with respect 
to the vertical, horizontal and side planes: cube, cuboid, 
parallelepiped, cylinder, cone, prism, and pyramid. If needed, 

92 see the next problem for clues. 

04_Chapter 4.indd   92 20-12-2025   16:44:09



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

3.	 Match each of the following objects with its projections.
FRONT TOP SIDE

04_Chapter 4.indd   93 20-12-2025   16:44:10



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

Shadows
Place an object in front of a plane, such as a wall of your room. Shine a 
torch light on the object in a direction perpendicular to the wall.

What do you see? 
We will see that the shape of the shadow on a plane is quite similar 

to the  shape of the projection on that plane! However the shadow may 
be scaled up, stretched, or even distorted slightly, depending on how the 
object is held. 
Observe what happens to the size of the shadow as you vary the distance 
between your torch and your object. 

Why does this happen? Try
This

Now, imagine your torch is extremely powerful and will continue 
casting a shadow of the object on the wall, no matter how far back you 
move it.

If this imaginary torch always points in a direction perpendicular 
to the wall, then, as the distance between the torch and the object 
increases, the shadow of the object will become indistinguishable from 
the projection of the object to the wall plane! 

Although this experiment may sound fanciful, you have encountered 
one such extremely powerful and distant torch before … namely, the 
Sun! Indeed, when sunlight is perpendicular to a plane, the shadows it 
casts on that plane are indistinguishable from projections!

Earlier we asked what the projection of a parallelogram might look 
like. You can now physically answer this question by making a cutout 
of a parallelogram and viewing its shadows under sunlight. No matter 
how you orient the parallelogram, you will see that the shadow remains 
a parallelogram! 

 
More generally, the projection of a pair of parallel lines will always 
remain parallel.

94

04_Chapter 4.indd   94 20-12-2025   16:44:11



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

This property is useful for drawing projections of objects.
Figure it Out

1.	 Draw the top view, front view and the side view of each of the 
following combinations of identical cubes.

Top Top

Side

Side
Front

Front

Top Top

Side

Front
Side

Front
Top

Top

Side

Front
Side

Front

2.	 Imagine eight identical cubes, glued together along faces to form 
the letter ‘ ’.
(i)	 This looks like a ‘ ’ from the front. What does it look like from 

the side? From the top?
(ii)	 Glue additional cubes to make a shape that looks like ‘ ’ Math 

from the front and ‘ ’ from the top. Talk
(iii)	 Now, can you glue even more cubes to make it look like ‘ ’ 

from the front, ‘ ’ from the top, and ‘ ’ from the side?
(iv)	 Can you think of other letter combinations to make with 

a single combination of cubes in this manner? 
95

04_Chapter 4.indd   95 20-12-2025   16:44:12



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

3.	 Which solid corresponds to the given top view, 
front view, and side view?

Front View Top View Side View

(i) Top (ii) Top (iii) Top (iv) Top

Side
Side Side Side

Front Front Front Front

(v) Top (vi) Top (vii) Top

Side Side
Side

Front Front Front

4.	 Using identical cubes, make a solid that gives the following 
projections.

(i) (ii) (iii)

Top View Front View Side View

(iv) (v) (vi)

Top View Front View Side View

(vii) (viii) (ix)

96 Top View Front View Side View

04_Chapter 4.indd   96 20-12-2025   16:44:14



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

5.	 Find the number of cubes in this stack of identical cubes.

6.	 What are the different shapes the projection of a cube can make 
under different orientations? Math 

Talk
Isometric Projections
In general we lose information when projecting a solid to a plane. But 
depending on the orientation of the solid, we can sometimes recover 
much of the information we’ve lost. 

Let us consider an orientation of a cube in which the lengths of the 
projections of all the edges of the cube are equal. Such a projection is 
called the isometric projection of the cube. ‘Isometric’ means ‘equal 
measure’ in Greek.

Imagine balancing a cube perfectly on one of its corner vertices, and 
then projecting it down to the floor plane. This projection is isometric 
and appears as shown.

Construct a model of a cube and use your hands to keep it balanced 
on one corner vertex. Can you try to understand why all the Math 
projected edges have equal length? Talk

The isometric representation of a cube is a regular 
hexagon. If the cube is made of glass, then all the edges 
would be visible.

This structure is the basis for isometric drawing! Tile 
the plane with hexagons and we get an isometric grid.

97

04_Chapter 4.indd   97 20-12-2025   16:44:16



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

Isometric grids are widely used in engineering. They make it easy to 
draw projections of solids and to measure lengths along all the 3 primary 
directions — length, depth and height, as shown in Fig. 4.7.

Vertical Side Plane
Plane

height

depth length

Horizontal
Plane

Fig. 4.7 

Drawing on Isometric Grids
Have you played Tetris? There are five basic shapes in Tetris, 
corresponding to the different ways of arranging four squares.

(i) (ii)

(iii) (iv) (v)

Fig. 4.8
98

04_Chapter 4.indd   98 20-12-2025   16:44:17



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

Imagine these are cubes, not squares. Draw each of these on your 
isometric paper (you can find it at the end of the book).

As seen in Fig. 4.7, there are three principal axes of the solid shape, 
which we will call the depth axis, length axis, and height axis.

The edges of the grid appear in three different orientations: 
,  and |. We will associate height to | , depth to  , and length to .

height

depth length

While drawing on the grid, it may be useful to draw edge by edge, 
counting the number of units you want to go along a given axis.

For example, you can draw a 1 × 1 × 1 cube as follows.  How would you 
draw a 2 × 2 × 2 cube? Feel free to add shading, if it helps you visualise 
the solid.

The first tetris shape is a row of four cubes joined face-to-face. In 
order to draw this solid, you will need to choose an orientation for the 
row of four cubes.  

Let’s draw it oriented along the depth axis. You could draw it 
cube-by-cube, but in that case you may need to erase the lines that get 
hidden by additional cubes. (If you don’t have an eraser, you can also 
draw faint lines initially, and then darken the visible ones later.)

height

depth length
99

04_Chapter 4.indd   99 20-12-2025   16:44:19



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

You could also draw it all at once, by counting edges as you go:

height

depth length

Similarly, you could draw the shape oriented along the height axis or 
the length axis.

height

depth length

In your drawing, moving in the vertical direction on the isometric 
paper corresponds to moving along the height axis of the solid. Similarly, 
moving along the  or  direction on the paper corresponds to moving 
along the length or depth axis respectively of the solid.
Why is this correspondence between directions on isometric paper and 
axes of the solid so effective for communicating the shape of the solid?

Earlier we observed that parallel lines project to parallel lines. This 
geometric fact ensures that the three families of parallel edges on the 
solid (corresponding to height, the length, and depth) project to three 
families of parallel edges on the isometric paper: |, , and . Moreover, 
the isometric nature of the projection ensures that the projections of 
unit distances along the three axes are equal.
Can you try drawing the other tetris shapes on isometric paper?
Figure it Out

1.	 In addition to the 5 ways shown in Fig. 4.8, are there any 
additional ways of gluing four cubes together along faces? Can Math 
you visualise and draw these as well? Talk

100

04_Chapter 4.indd   100 20-12-2025   16:44:22



Exploring Some Geometric Themes

2.	 Draw the following figures on the isometric grid.

[Hint: It may be useful to determine whether the edge to be currently 
drawn — say, along the height — goes from down to up or up to down. 
Accordingly, draw the line segment on the grid either in the direction 
of the height axis or opposite to it.]

3.	 Is there anything strange about the path of this ball? Recreate  Math 
it on the isometric grid. Talk

[Hint: Consider a portion of this figure that is physically realisable 
and identify the 3 primary directions.]

4.	 Observe this triangle.

(i)	 Would it be possible to build a model out of actual cubes? What 
are the front, top, and side profiles of this impossible triangle? 

101

04_Chapter 4.indd   101 20-12-2025   16:44:24



Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 | Part-II

(ii)	 Recreate this on an isometric grid.
(iii)	 Why does the illusion work? Math 

Talk

SUMMARY

y	 Fractals are self-similar geometric objects found in nature and 
in art.

y	 The Sierpinski Carpet, Sierpinski Gasket, and Koch Snowflake 
are some examples of mathematical fractals. They can be 
obtained by repeatedly applying certain geometric operations 
that generate a sequence of shapes approaching the fractal.    

y	 Cuboids, tetrahedrons, cylinders, cones, prisms, pyramids, and 
octahedrons are some of the solids that can be obtained by 
folding suitable nets.

y	 The shortest path between two points on the surface of a cuboid 
can be found by using a suitable net of the cuboid.  

y	 Any object can be represented on a plane surface by using its 
projections on plane surfaces. For this purpose, we generally 
use the front view (projection on the vertical plane), top view 
(projection on the horizontal plane), and side view (projection 
on the side plane) of the object.

y	 A cube can be oriented such that the lengths of all its edges 
in the projection are equal. Such a projection is called the 
isometric projection. Isometric projections of different solids 
can be drawn using isometric grid paper.

102

04_Chapter 4.indd   102 20-12-2025   16:44:25